README.md, before:

# PyBase

> Self-hosted Airtable alternative with CAD/PDF extraction capabilities

[![Python 3.11+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.11+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-0.109+-00a393.svg)](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/)
[![PostgreSQL](https://img.shields.io/badge/PostgreSQL-15+-336791.svg)](https://www.postgresql.org/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

## Overview

PyBase is a powerful, self-hosted database platform that combines the flexibility of spreadsheets with the power of a real database. Built for engineering teams, it includes specialized features for extracting data from CAD files (DXF, IFC, STEP) and PDFs.

### Key Features

- **30+ Field Types**: Text, number, date, attachments, linked records, formulas, and engineering-specific fields
- **Multiple Views**: Grid, Kanban, Calendar, Gallery, Form, Gantt, and Timeline views
- **CAD/PDF Extraction**: Extract tables, dimensions, and metadata from engineering drawings
- **Real-time Collaboration**: WebSocket-based live updates and presence
- **Automations**: Trigger-based workflows with webhooks and integrations
- **Self-hosted**: Full control over your data with Docker deployment

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.11+
- Docker & Docker Compose
- PostgreSQL 15+ (or use Docker)
- Redis 7+ (or use Docker)

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/pybase/pybase.git
cd pybase

# Start services with Docker Compose
docker compose up -d

# Install dependencies
pip install -e ".[all]"

# Run database migrations
alembic upgrade head

# Start the development server
uvicorn pybase.main:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

### Environment Variables

Create a `.env` file in the project root:

```env
# Application
ENVIRONMENT=development
DEBUG=true
SECRET_KEY=your-secret-key-change-in-production

# Database
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+asyncpg://pybase:pybase@localhost:5432/pybase

# Redis
REDIS_URL=redis://localhost:6379/0

# Object Storage (MinIO)
S3_ENDPOINT_URL=http://localhost:9000
S3_ACCESS_KEY=minioadmin
S3_SECRET_KEY=minioadmin
S3_BUCKET_NAME=pybase

# Optional: Werk24 API for engineering drawing extraction
WERK24_API_KEY=your-werk24-api-key
```

## Project Structure

```
pybase/
├── src/pybase/
│   ├── api/                 # FastAPI routes
│   │   ├── v1/
│   │   │   ├── auth.py      # Authentication endpoints
│   │   │   ├── users.py     # User management
│   │   │   ├── workspaces.py
│   │   │   ├── bases.py
│   │   │   ├── tables.py
│   │   │   ├── fields.py
│   │   │   ├── records.py
│   │   │   └── extraction.py # CAD/PDF extraction endpoints
│   │   └── deps.py          # Dependency injection
│   ├── core/                # Core configuration
│   │   ├── config.py        # Settings management
│   │   ├── security.py      # JWT & password hashing
│   │   └── logging.py       # Logging configuration
│   ├── db/                  # Database layer
│   │   ├── base.py          # SQLAlchemy base
│   │   ├── session.py       # Database session
│   │   └── migrations/      # Alembic migrations
│   ├── models/              # SQLAlchemy models
│   │   ├── user.py
│   │   ├── workspace.py
│   │   ├── base.py
│   │   ├── table.py
│   │   ├── field.py
│   │   └── record.py
│   ├── schemas/             # Pydantic schemas
│   ├── services/            # Business logic
│   ├── fields/              # Field type implementations
│   │   ├── base.py          # Base field handler
│   │   ├── text.py
│   │   ├── number.py
│   │   ├── date.py
│   │   ├── attachment.py
│   │   ├── linked_record.py
│   │   ├── formula.py
│   │   └── engineering/     # Engineering-specific fields
│   │       ├── dimension.py
│   │       ├── gdt.py       # GD&T (Geometric Tolerancing)
│   │       ├── thread.py
│   │       └── material.py
│   ├── extraction/          # CAD/PDF extraction
│   │   ├── pdf/
│   │   │   ├── extractor.py
│   │   │   ├── table_extractor.py
│   │   │   └── ocr.py
│   │   ├── cad/
│   │   │   ├── dxf_parser.py
│   │   │   ├── ifc_parser.py
│   │   │   └── step_parser.py
│   │   └── werk24/          # Werk24 API integration
│   └── main.py              # FastAPI application
├── tests/                   # Test suite
├── docker/                  # Docker configurations
├── docs/                    # Documentation
├── docker-compose.yml
├── pyproject.toml
└── README.md
```

## Documentation

### General
- [Project Overview (PDR)](docs/project-overview-pdr.md)
- [System Architecture](docs/system-architecture.md)
- [Codebase Summary](docs/codebase-summary.md)
- [Code Standards](docs/code-standards.md)
- [Project Roadmap](docs/project-roadmap.md)
- [Deployment Guide](docs/deployment-guide.md)
- [Troubleshooting Guide](docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md)
- [Design Guidelines](docs/design-guidelines.md)

### Frontend
- [Frontend Architecture](docs/frontend-architecture.md) - Tech stack, folder structure, and architecture decisions
- [Component Patterns](docs/frontend-component-patterns.md) - UI components, field editors, views, and composition patterns
- [State Management](docs/frontend-state-management.md) - TanStack Query, Zustand, and API integration patterns

### API & Features
- [API Reference](docs/api.md)
- [Field Types](docs/fields.md)
- [CAD/PDF Extraction](docs/extraction.md)


## Engineering-Specific Features

### Supported CAD Formats

| Format | Extension | Library | Features |
|--------|-----------|---------|----------|
| AutoCAD | .dxf, .dwg | ezdxf | Layers, blocks, dimensions, text |
| IFC/BIM | .ifc | ifcopenshell | Building elements, properties, geometry |
| STEP | .stp, .step | cadquery | 3D geometry, assemblies, metadata |

### Engineering Field Types

- **Dimension**: Value with tolerance (e.g., `10.5 ±0.1 mm`)
- **GD&T**: Geometric dimensioning and tolerancing symbols
- **Thread**: Thread specifications (e.g., `M8x1.25`)
- **Surface Finish**: Surface roughness values (e.g., `Ra 1.6`)
- **Material**: Material specifications with properties
- **Drawing Reference**: Links to drawing files with revision tracking

## API Examples

### Create a Table

```bash
curl -X POST "http://localhost:8000/api/v1/bases/{base_id}/tables" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "Parts",
    "fields": [
      {"name": "Part Number", "type": "text"},
      {"name": "Description", "type": "long_text"},
      {"name": "Dimension", "type": "dimension", "options": {"unit": "mm"}},
      {"name": "Material", "type": "material"}
    ]
  }'
```

### Extract Data from PDF

```bash
curl -X POST "http://localhost:8000/api/v1/extraction/pdf" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  -F "file=@drawing.pdf" \
  -F "extract_tables=true" \
  -F "extract_dimensions=true"
```

## Development

```bash
# Install development dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Run tests
pytest

# Run tests with coverage
pytest --cov=pybase --cov-report=html

# Format code
black src tests
ruff check src tests --fix

# Type checking
mypy src

# Run pre-commit hooks
pre-commit run --all-files
```

## Roadmap

- [x] Phase 1: Foundation (Auth, Database, Core Models) - **COMPLETE**
- [x] Phase 2: Core Database Features (Field Types, Records) - **COMPLETE: 30+ field types**
- [x] Phase 3: CAD/PDF Extraction - **COMPLETE: PDF, DXF, IFC, STEP parsers + Werk24 API**
- [x] Phase 4: Views - **COMPLETE: Grid, Kanban, Calendar, Gallery, Form, Gantt, Timeline**
- [x] Phase 5: Real-time Collaboration - **COMPLETE: WebSocket connections, presence, cell focus, cursor tracking**
- [x] Phase 6: Automations & Webhooks - **COMPLETE: 11 trigger types, 12 action types, execution engine, webhooks**
- [ ] Phase 7: Frontend (React + TypeScript) - **IN PROGRESS: 80% complete (Auth, Base, Table, Grid/Kanban/Form/Calendar views done)**
- [ ] Phase 8: Search & AI Features - **IN PROGRESS: 20% complete (Search API skeleton, Meilisearch pending)**
- [ ] Phase 9: Production Deployment - **IN PROGRESS: 10% complete (Docker Compose exists, K8s/Monitoring pending)**


**Backend is feature-complete!** All 6 backend phases (1-6) are fully implemented with comprehensive APIs. Frontend development (Phase 7) is currently in progress.

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines.

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

## Acknowledgments

- [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) - Modern Python web framework
- [SQLAlchemy](https://www.sqlalchemy.org/) - Database ORM
- [ezdxf](https://ezdxf.mozman.at/) - DXF file processing
- [ifcopenshell](http://ifcopenshell.org/) - IFC/BIM processing
- [Werk24](https://werk24.io/) - Engineering drawing AI extraction

Commit message:

auto-claude: subtask-5-2 - Update README with Werk24 feature

README.md, after:

# PyBase

> Self-hosted Airtable alternative with CAD/PDF extraction capabilities

[![Python 3.11+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.11+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-0.109+-00a393.svg)](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/)
[![PostgreSQL](https://img.shields.io/badge/PostgreSQL-15+-336791.svg)](https://www.postgresql.org/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

## Overview

PyBase is a powerful, self-hosted database platform that combines the flexibility of spreadsheets with the power of a real database. Built for engineering teams, it includes specialized features for extracting data from CAD files (DXF, IFC, STEP) and PDFs.

### Key Features

- **30+ Field Types**: Text, number, date, attachments, linked records, formulas, and engineering-specific fields
- **Multiple Views**: Grid, Kanban, Calendar, Gallery, Form, Gantt, and Timeline views
- **CAD/PDF Extraction**: Extract tables, dimensions, and metadata from engineering drawings
- **Werk24 AI Integration**: AI-powered extraction of technical drawings with intelligent recognition of dimensions, tolerances, and GD&T symbols
- **Real-time Collaboration**: WebSocket-based live updates and presence
- **Automations**: Trigger-based workflows with webhooks and integrations
- **Self-hosted**: Full control over your data with Docker deployment

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.11+
- Docker & Docker Compose
- PostgreSQL 15+ (or use Docker)
- Redis 7+ (or use Docker)

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/pybase/pybase.git
cd pybase

# Start services with Docker Compose
docker compose up -d

# Install dependencies
pip install -e ".[all]"

# Run database migrations
alembic upgrade head

# Start the development server
uvicorn pybase.main:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

### Environment Variables

Create a `.env` file in the project root:

```env
# Application
ENVIRONMENT=development
DEBUG=true
SECRET_KEY=your-secret-key-change-in-production

# Database
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+asyncpg://pybase:pybase@localhost:5432/pybase

# Redis
REDIS_URL=redis://localhost:6379/0

# Object Storage (MinIO)
S3_ENDPOINT_URL=http://localhost:9000
S3_ACCESS_KEY=minioadmin
S3_SECRET_KEY=minioadmin
S3_BUCKET_NAME=pybase

# Optional: Werk24 API for engineering drawing extraction
WERK24_API_KEY=your-werk24-api-key
```

## Project Structure

```
pybase/
├── src/pybase/
│   ├── api/                 # FastAPI routes
│   │   ├── v1/
│   │   │   ├── auth.py      # Authentication endpoints
│   │   │   ├── users.py     # User management
│   │   │   ├── workspaces.py
│   │   │   ├── bases.py
│   │   │   ├── tables.py
│   │   │   ├── fields.py
│   │   │   ├── records.py
│   │   │   └── extraction.py # CAD/PDF extraction endpoints
│   │   └── deps.py          # Dependency injection
│   ├── core/                # Core configuration
│   │   ├── config.py        # Settings management
│   │   ├── security.py      # JWT & password hashing
│   │   └── logging.py       # Logging configuration
│   ├── db/                  # Database layer
│   │   ├── base.py          # SQLAlchemy base
│   │   ├── session.py       # Database session
│   │   └── migrations/      # Alembic migrations
│   ├── models/              # SQLAlchemy models
│   │   ├── user.py
│   │   ├── workspace.py
│   │   ├── base.py
│   │   ├── table.py
│   │   ├── field.py
│   │   └── record.py
│   ├── schemas/             # Pydantic schemas
│   ├── services/            # Business logic
│   ├── fields/              # Field type implementations
│   │   ├── base.py          # Base field handler
│   │   ├── text.py
│   │   ├── number.py
│   │   ├── date.py
│   │   ├── attachment.py
│   │   ├── linked_record.py
│   │   ├── formula.py
│   │   └── engineering/     # Engineering-specific fields
│   │       ├── dimension.py
│   │       ├── gdt.py       # GD&T (Geometric Tolerancing)
│   │       ├── thread.py
│   │       └── material.py
│   ├── extraction/          # CAD/PDF extraction
│   │   ├── pdf/
│   │   │   ├── extractor.py
│   │   │   ├── table_extractor.py
│   │   │   └── ocr.py
│   │   ├── cad/
│   │   │   ├── dxf_parser.py
│   │   │   ├── ifc_parser.py
│   │   │   └── step_parser.py
│   │   └── werk24/          # Werk24 API integration
│   └── main.py              # FastAPI application
├── tests/                   # Test suite
├── docker/                  # Docker configurations
├── docs/                    # Documentation
├── docker-compose.yml
├── pyproject.toml
└── README.md
```

## Documentation

### General
- [Project Overview (PDR)](docs/project-overview-pdr.md)
- [System Architecture](docs/system-architecture.md)
- [Codebase Summary](docs/codebase-summary.md)
- [Code Standards](docs/code-standards.md)
- [Project Roadmap](docs/project-roadmap.md)
- [Deployment Guide](docs/deployment-guide.md)
- [Troubleshooting Guide](docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md)
- [Design Guidelines](docs/design-guidelines.md)

### Frontend
- [Frontend Architecture](docs/frontend-architecture.md) - Tech stack, folder structure, and architecture decisions
- [Component Patterns](docs/frontend-component-patterns.md) - UI components, field editors, views, and composition patterns
- [State Management](docs/frontend-state-management.md) - TanStack Query, Zustand, and API integration patterns

### API & Features
- [API Reference](docs/api.md)
- [Field Types](docs/fields.md)
- [CAD/PDF Extraction](docs/extraction.md)


## Engineering-Specific Features

### Supported CAD Formats

| Format | Extension | Library | Features |
|--------|-----------|---------|----------|
| AutoCAD | .dxf, .dwg | ezdxf | Layers, blocks, dimensions, text |
| IFC/BIM | .ifc | ifcopenshell | Building elements, properties, geometry |
| STEP | .stp, .step | cadquery | 3D geometry, assemblies, metadata |

### Werk24 AI Extraction

PyBase integrates with [Werk24](https://werk24.io/), an AI-powered service for automated extraction of technical data from engineering drawings. This feature enables intelligent recognition and extraction of:

- **Dimensions & Tolerances**: Automatically extract linear, radial, and angular dimensions with their associated tolerances
- **GD&T Symbols**: Recognize and parse geometric dimensioning and tolerancing callouts
- **Part Information**: Extract title blocks, part numbers, material specifications, and revision information
- **Manufacturing Data**: Identify surface finish requirements, thread specifications, and heat treatment notes

The Werk24 integration requires an API key (optional). When configured, PyBase can automatically process uploaded PDF drawings and populate database fields with extracted technical data, significantly reducing manual data entry for engineering teams.

### Engineering Field Types

- **Dimension**: Value with tolerance (e.g., `10.5 ±0.1 mm`)
- **GD&T**: Geometric dimensioning and tolerancing symbols
- **Thread**: Thread specifications (e.g., `M8x1.25`)
- **Surface Finish**: Surface roughness values (e.g., `Ra 1.6`)
- **Material**: Material specifications with properties
- **Drawing Reference**: Links to drawing files with revision tracking

## API Examples

### Create a Table

```bash
curl -X POST "http://localhost:8000/api/v1/bases/{base_id}/tables" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "Parts",
    "fields": [
      {"name": "Part Number", "type": "text"},
      {"name": "Description", "type": "long_text"},
      {"name": "Dimension", "type": "dimension", "options": {"unit": "mm"}},
      {"name": "Material", "type": "material"}
    ]
  }'
```

### Extract Data from PDF

```bash
curl -X POST "http://localhost:8000/api/v1/extraction/pdf" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  -F "file=@drawing.pdf" \
  -F "extract_tables=true" \
  -F "extract_dimensions=true"
```

## Development

```bash
# Install development dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Run tests
pytest

# Run tests with coverage
pytest --cov=pybase --cov-report=html

# Format code
black src tests
ruff check src tests --fix

# Type checking
mypy src

# Run pre-commit hooks
pre-commit run --all-files
```

## Roadmap

- [x] Phase 1: Foundation (Auth, Database, Core Models) - **COMPLETE**
- [x] Phase 2: Core Database Features (Field Types, Records) - **COMPLETE: 30+ field types**
- [x] Phase 3: CAD/PDF Extraction - **COMPLETE: PDF, DXF, IFC, STEP parsers + Werk24 API**
- [x] Phase 4: Views - **COMPLETE: Grid, Kanban, Calendar, Gallery, Form, Gantt, Timeline**
- [x] Phase 5: Real-time Collaboration - **COMPLETE: WebSocket connections, presence, cell focus, cursor tracking**
- [x] Phase 6: Automations & Webhooks - **COMPLETE: 11 trigger types, 12 action types, execution engine, webhooks**
- [ ] Phase 7: Frontend (React + TypeScript) - **IN PROGRESS: 80% complete (Auth, Base, Table, Grid/Kanban/Form/Calendar views done)**
- [ ] Phase 8: Search & AI Features - **IN PROGRESS: 20% complete (Search API skeleton, Meilisearch pending)**
- [ ] Phase 9: Production Deployment - **IN PROGRESS: 10% complete (Docker Compose exists, K8s/Monitoring pending)**


**Backend is feature-complete!** All 6 backend phases (1-6) are fully implemented with comprehensive APIs. Frontend development (Phase 7) is currently in progress.

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines.

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

## Acknowledgments

- [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) - Modern Python web framework
- [SQLAlchemy](https://www.sqlalchemy.org/) - Database ORM
- [ezdxf](https://ezdxf.mozman.at/) - DXF file processing
- [ifcopenshell](http://ifcopenshell.org/) - IFC/BIM processing
- [Werk24](https://werk24.io/) - Engineering drawing AI extraction
